---
layout: post
title: "STEP 1 2007 Q5"
description: "A quick workthrough of a STEP question I did."
tags: [maths]
---

# STEP 1 2007 Question 5
I'm going to give a quick workthrough of this STEP 1 question I did while practicing the other day.

I don't consider geometry to be a strongpoint of mine so it was quite fun to be able to get some practice in and get to the correct answer!

I'll start off by showing you the question:
{% include image.html path="posts/2019/March/STEP2007Q5/question_screenshot.png" path-detail="posts/2019/March/STEP2007Q5/question_screenshot.png" alt="Screenshot of the question" %}

So I found this question slightly different from other STEP questions. Typically, there is a quick introductory part which kind of indicates to you whether you might want to attempt this question or not. This question however was quite vague from the beginning and just gives you two open parts to tackle however you like.

At first I struggled with trying to imagine how I would construct a triangle within or around the octahedron that would enable me to work towards a triangle with the angle between two faces in it. I was mostly thinking about the outside edges of the octahedron rather than inside of it.

Then I realised that by finding the angle between the central square plane in the very centre of the octahedron (i.e the base of two square based pyramids stuck together) and one of the faces, would be half the angle between any two faces.

{% include image.html path="posts/2019/March/STEP2007Q5/octahedron_sketch.jpg" path-detail="posts/2019/March/STEP2007Q5/octahedron_sketch.jpg" alt="A sketch of the internal triangle I constructed" %}

As you can see from my sketch, we know a lot of information about the octahedron as it is completely constructed from equilateral triangles. So all I really need to do now is construct that red triangle and find twice the angle $$ \alpha $$.

To construct the red triangle I first needed to find the height of any face of the octahedron. I gave the side lengths of the equilateral triangles an arbitrary value - $$ a $$.

{% include image.html path="posts/2019/March/STEP2007Q5/face_height.jpg"  path-detail="posts/2019/March/STEP2007Q5/face_height.jpg" alt="The triangle sketch to find the height of a face" %}

As you can see the height of a face is $$ \frac{a\sqrt 3}{2} $$. Now we have this height we can construct the red triangle inside the octahedron.

We know that the base of this triangle will be $$ \frac{a}{2} $$ because the side lengths of the face triangles are $$ a $$ and therefore so are the side lengths of square in the centre.

As mentioned earlier $$ \alpha $$ is half the angle between two faces. To find the full angle we can use the identity $$ \cos2\alpha = 2\cos^2\alpha -1 $$. Using this identity we get to the answer of part (i) of the question.

{% include image.html path="posts/2019/March/STEP2007Q5/find_alpha.jpg" path-detail="posts/2019/March/STEP2007Q5/find_alpha.jpg" alt="The inner triangle in order to find alpha" %}

Now on to part (ii). To start off with we need to find the side lengths of the inscribed cube. From the question we know that the corners of the cube touch the centre of the triangular faces. Where is the centre of a triangle you may ask? Luckily, in my maths lessons recently we had been finding centres of masses of different shapes and I knew that the centre of a triangle was $$ \frac{2}{3}h $$ from the vertex where $$ h $$ is the height of the triangle.

I'm not sure whether this would have been in the formula booklet that you used to be given in 2007, however, you are no longer given a formula book so this is the sort of information that I'm just going to have to memorise for when I take the exam!

Back to it. I then found the height up the face that the corner of the cube would touch, using the previous knowledge.

{% include image.html path="posts/2019/March/STEP2007Q5/centre_of_face.jpg" path-detail="posts/2019/March/STEP2007Q5/centre_of_face.jpg" alt="Finding the centre of a triangular face" %}

So we know that the height up the face that the cube touches is $$ \frac{a\sqrt3}{6} $$. Using this knowledge we can construct a smaller triangle, similar to the red one that we used to find $$ \alpha $$ in part (i).

{% include image.html path="posts/2019/March/STEP2007Q5/cube_side_length.jpg" path-detail="posts/2019/March/STEP2007Q5/cube_side_length.jpg" alt="Finding half the side length of the inscribed cube" %}

This little triangle enables us to find half the side length of the inscribed cube, $$ x $$. We can use the identity $$ \sin\alpha = \sqrt{1 - \cos^2\alpha} $$ to find $$ \sin\alpha $$ which we can then use to find $$ x $$. We know that the hypotenuse of this little triangle is $$ \frac{a\sqrt3}{6} $$ so we then do $$ \frac{a\sqrt3}{6} * \frac{\sqrt2}{\sqrt3} $$ to get half the cube's side length, $$ \frac{a\sqrt2}{6} $$.

This cube can be slightly hard to image, I tried to do a sketch to help show what it looks like:

{% include image.html path="posts/2019/March/STEP2007Q5/cube_inside.jpg" path-detail="posts/2019/March/STEP2007Q5/cube_inside.jpg" alt="The inscribed cube" %}

So now onto the final part. All we need to work out is the cube volume, using $$  (side length)^3 $$, and the volume of the octahedron using $$ \frac{1}{3}a^2h $$ where in our case h is twice the height of the inner red triangle from part (i). You can see this in the picture below (I just used pythagoras to find it).

{% include image.html path="posts/2019/March/STEP2007Q5/find_ratio.jpg" path-detail="posts/2019/March/STEP2007Q5/find_ratio.jpg" alt="Finding the ratio of volumes" %}

So that's it! I hope you found this somewhat useful. I've mainly written it to see how writing a technical blog post feels with the new template that I'm using and also to see what MathJax is like for rendering LaTeX equations.